The year is slowly coming to an end and we're anticipating a new and exciting year for women's football. Great emotions, special awards, exciting qualifiers and World Cup debutants: that's exactly how you could describe the women's football year in 2018.

FIFA.com has summarised the most beautiful events and moments in 2018 in pictures for you. Enjoy the gallery and have a happy new year.

"What weÅfve achieved hasnÅft sunk in yet,Åh said SpainÅfs U-17 womenÅfs coach Tona Is, who was still on a high after returning from Uruguay, where La Rojita were crowned world champions in the age group on 1 December.

Those words could just as easily refer to the amazing 2018 that Spanish womenÅfs football has enjoyed, a year in which the senior national team won all their qualifying matches to reach their second FIFA Women's World Cup?, while also lifting the Cyprus Cup.

In the meantime, the countryÅfs youth teams have been in a class of their own, with the U-20s being crowned European champions and finishing as U-20 Women's World Cup runners-up in France, and the U-17s outdoing their elder compatriots to become European and world champions.

"I think this world title ? the first for Spanish women's football ? will be a turning point,Åh Is told FIFA.com.


"The biggest success is achieving consistency," said Jorge Vilda, coach of SpainÅfs senior womenÅfs team and technical director of all the countryÅfs national womenÅfs teams. "ItÅfs not going to be easy to repeat the kind of year weÅfve had, but weÅfre working on how to keep reaching semi-finals and finals, on maintaining the standard."

As SpainÅfs record over the last five years shows, their stunning 2018 has been no overnight success:

YEAR	U-17	U-19	U-20
2014	European Championship and World Cup runners-up	European Championship runners-up	Did not qualify
2015	European champions	European Championship runners-up	No competition held
2016	European Championship runners-up and third at the World Cup	European Championship runners-up	Sixth
2017	European Championship runners-up	European champions	No competition held
2018	European and world champions	European champions	World Cup runners-up
YEAR

"From the very first day I started working with the Spanish FA, when Germany beat us 7-0, weÅfve been looking at how to do things the best we can," said SpainÅfs U-20 women's team coach Pedro Lopez.

Despite the fact Spain have only a little over 42,000 registered female players ? 15 times fewer than Germany, for example ? they are doing more than just hold their own. La RojitaÅfs 2-0 defeat of the Germans in the final of this year's UEFA European WomenÅfs U-17 Championship proved that point.

So what lies behind SpainÅfs phenomenal success?

A style of play that is non-negotiable
"For the last 12 years weÅfve been working on the same methodology, which is based on a philosophy that everyone knows,Åh explained Vilda. The golden age enjoyed by SpainÅfs menÅfs national team was founded on a possession-based passing game, the very same recipe for success that its womenÅfs teams have used to great effect.

"We play in a way that the players really enjoy. They understand it and believe in it,Åh said Is of a style in which talent takes precedence over physical fitness. Patri Guijarro and Claudia Pina, the respective adidas Golden Ball winners at this yearÅfs U-20 and U-17 WomenÅfs World Cups, are two prime examples of that.


Guijarro and Pina showed their goalscoring prowess against Paraguay at this year's U-20 WomenÅfs World Cup in France

A system for unearthing talent
Vilda, Is and Lopez work in unison and are the visible head of a system that seeks out the right players. "The Spanish FA and the regional federations make a structure available to us, so that we can reach any of the 42,000 registered players," said Vilda.

That structure includes people who, in many cases, act as scouts but expect nothing in return. "They might spot a player whoÅfs playing mixed football in a village and who we might not otherwise be able to reach, and they tell us about them," he continued.

The next step up is the regional representative teams. "TheyÅfre our youth academies, if you will," said Lopez. "WeÅfre there at every regional championship, where the best U-12, U-15 and U-17 players from every autonomous region play," added Vilda. "We select the best of them for the national team."

 Embedded video

FUTbol FEMenino


19.3K
09:11 - 2 Dec 2018
7,941 people are talking about this
Twitter Ads information and privacy
A professional league and increased visibility
SpainÅfs appearance at the FIFA WomenÅfs World Cup Canada 2015?, and the professionalisation of the domestic league shortly afterwards, gave Spanish womenÅfs football the kind of profile it had never enjoyed before. As a result, the number of registered women's players has risen nearly 30 per cent since 2014, with the biggest increase coming in the five-to-13 age group. Those numbers can be expected to grow even more.

"The triumphs of 2018 are having a big impact," said Lopez. "WeÅfre reaching out to every household in Spain now. Young women can see that womenÅfs football is in vogue, which is only going to help us keep growing."

The question is, with six months to go before France 2019, to what extent can Spain's seniors tap into the success of the youth teams? With Spain having failed to get past the group phase on their Women's World Cup debut in Canada, Vilda is taking a realistic view. "They can tap into it, yes, but we need to keep our feet on the ground. We're currently 12th in the FIFA Ranking and fifth in UEFAÅfs."

There is no question, however, that progress is being made: "The great thing is that in the race to improve, we are running faster than other national teams. They may have put their faith in women and sport at an earlier stage, thanks in the main to their national cultures, but the gap between them and us is shrinking all the time."

The 2018 FIFA World Cup Russia? may have shaped the past year, but there were plenty of highlights in women's football as well. Two tournaments offered players the chance to showcase their talents on the global stage and demonstrate just how quickly the women's game is developing. The FIFA U-20 Women's World Cup in France provided a view of what is to come in the senior competition next year, while Spain were crowned champions at the FIFA U-17 Women's World Cup in Uruguay. On top of that, the FIFA Women's World Cup France 2019? qualifying campaign drew to a close and the participating teams discovered who they will face in the group stage at the Draw on 8 December.

However, tournaments were not the only aspects of women's football to feature on FIFA.com. We also conducted numerous interviews with current and former players and coaches, as well as important figures from the global game.

Transforming IR Iran's women's football
"The strength, the tenacity and the vibrant culture of these women here is what caught my attention. They were so fierce, so strong and I wanted to be one of them."
Katayoun Khosrowyar is the first Iranian women to hold a FIFA 'A' coaching license

New role as Germany coach
"I'm well aware of how big a responsibility it is and I know it'll be an incredible opportunity. I'm looking forward to getting to know the players. I already know a few of them, but there are so many new, young, exciting players I can't wait to meet. I'm really looking forward to reconnecting with people I've worked with in the past."
Martina Voss-Tecklenburg, who took charge of Germany's women's team following the conclusion of the France 2019 qualifying campaign

View image on Twitter
View image on Twitter

Germany
?
@DFB_Team_EN
 ??? "I want to win titles. I have never won the World Cup before."

Read all about Martina Voss-Tecklenburg's first press conference as Germany Women's head coach here ?? http://bit.ly/Voss-TecklenburgPresser Åc

148
00:15 - 1 Dec 2018
See Germany's other Tweets
Twitter Ads information and privacy
Nothing is impossible
"My opinion is that disabilities canÅft be an obstacle for someone who wants to play football."
Ivana Vlajic, women's football coordinator for the Bosnia and Herzegovina Football Federation

Bigger picture
"I had to relearn to walk three times in two years, so that was tough. I spent months in a wheelchair, crutches, the lot. ItÅfs just difficult because you build up and need a new surgery, then build up again before another one."
Belgium's Yana Daniels was sidelined for two years with a serious knee injury

The magic of football
"To be honest, football is something that I simply find wonderful. Being a player in the stadium was my whole world. I felt free-spirited and liberated, and it was a feeling that I wanted to keep hold of. As a referee, I can sense the excitement and the emotions of the players, and feel what the spectators are feeling. ItÅfs really special."
Korea DPR's Ri Hyang Ok has experienced World Cups both as a player and as a referee


Eyes on the prize
"I handled my situation of being homeless pretty easily. I had football to focus on. I wanted to represent my country and I wasnÅft going to let anything get in the way."
England's Fara Williams was homeless for over six years

Winning trophies never gets old
"When the day comes where I no longer feel the emotion that I feel, that will and desire to want to be here every time, to be nominated among the best players, to compete for a prize that represents the ultimate level, if I donÅft feel this desire anymore, if I donÅft get nervous before coming to be interviewed here at the awards, or emotional during them, maybe it will be because the hour will have arrived for me to stop, and for football to stop being the centre of my being. But if I still feel all this on every occasion, it's because I really feel it. ItÅfs my life, ever since I was six years old."
Marta was named the best women's player in the world for a sixth time

Special moment for South African football
"There are so many footballers in South Africa who look up to players in the national team. We want to open doors for them. We want the world to see that South Africa has talent, and have the players to compete on the world stage."
Refiloe Jane helped the Banyana Banyana qualify for the Women's World Cup

 
MEET THE TEAMS 
The curse of the champions?
"For so many in our squad, this will be their first World Cup and those new players bring a youthful energy that, speaking as a veteran, is really contagious. I can see the concern but, while the public and media might see us as ÅedefendingÅf this title, for us itÅfs a totally new challenge with a new team and a new dynamic. Hunger wonÅft be an issue."
USA captain Alex Morgan on her team's motivation ahead of France 2019

Considered as a nexus of the peoples and cultures of Oceania and mainland Asia, Indonesians have proven to be extremely passionate about football in a country where the beautiful game is the number one sport and where the Liga 1 (professional league), established in the 2008/09 season, is getting stronger every year.

PSSI (Football Association of Indonesia) has set up some challenging goals for meeting the ever-increasing demand of the 200 million strong football nation for high quality football. In a strategy named FILANESIA (National Football Development Programme), that spans until 2045, the focal point is the capacity building of coaches and referees.

To achieve this objective, FIFA Forward and PSSI started a partnership to develop both refereeing and coaching programmes in the Asian archipelago, which enables the federation to sustain the professionalisation of their referees and coaches.

With the support and assistance of a refereeing-specialist delegation from FIFA, the needs of the local refereeing and coaching representatives along with clear goals, were drafted. PSSI went on to adopt a new strategy which includes, among other things, advancing the level of refereeing to the highest possible standards.

"FILANESIA (National Football Development Programme) is a capacity building for our coaches and players," PSSI Secretary General Ms. Ratu Tisha explained. "The number of coaches has tripled over the last year and the number of domestic instructors is ten times higher than before. We have also established 18 Elite Pro academies for Liga 1 clubs that focus on U-16 player development. Secondly, a referee development programme was initiated to set up a new Referee Management System and operation cycle. Over 1,207 referees were selected for a quality workshop and a new management system has been set up for the referee department, starting from administration to an education team."


To achieve this important endeavour, the PSSI used the help of the FIFA Forward Development Programme, in order to ensure that all referees receive the necessary training they need to enable them to take part in international competitions.

The elements of a strong referee programme are incorporated into education, evaluation and communication, which are PSSIÅfs main focal points for the project. Coaches are key to providing education, evaluation and feedback and conducting annual assessment courses; instructor courses are also a paramount element of this strategy.

Hiring experienced international assessors to observe league referees and national referees is also an important aspect since internationally-hired assessors will also mentor and monitor the new Indonesian assessors.

"FIFA ForwardÅfs support is the foundation of PSSI's football development, focusing on capacity building for coaches, referees and players to reach our long-term target in 2045, starting from 2024 as the first milestone and 2034 as the second milestone," said PSSI Vice President Mr. Joko Driyono. "PSSI would like to thank the full support of FIFA's Member Association Development and Regional Development Office, who were of great help to us during the process of planning and execution. We realise that there is still so much room for improvement and PSSI is thankful to FIFA, who always supports us in this long journey to reach our vision."

Eventually the aim will be to create two categories of referees and coaches (assessors and instructors, national and regional coaches). This will undoubtedly boost local refereeing and coaching in the lead up to many international competitions.

2018 FILANESIA programme in numbers:

Over 100 courses have been held across Indonesia, starting from PSSI D License up to AFC Pro
As a result, the number of coaches has tripled within a year
PSSI established 18 Elite Pro academies that train coaches and implement the FILANESIA curriculum to young players
The participation of women referees has increased by 30 per cent
162 fitness and technical tests have been conducted to strengthen the physical condition of the referees
For the first time, one of Indonesia's top referees was a part of the AFC Elite Referee Panel

